How-to: build and deploy NORTH images (#200)
FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-docs: docs/howto/plugins/types/north_tools.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for more details on the best development practices for plugins, including linting, testing, and documenting.
```

Author: for more details

md#northtoolentrypoint) and a [`NorthTool`](../../../reference/config.md#northtool).

### Key Configuration Options

When defining your NORTH tool, consider these important configuration options:

- **image**: Location of the Docker image (e.g., `ghcr.io/<username>/<plugin-name>:latest`). This should point to a container registry where your image is published.
- **file_extensions**: The file extensions of files that this tool should be launchable for.
- **mount_path**: The directory inside the container where NOMAD data or other relevant files for data analysis will be mounted (e.g., `/home/jovyan/data` for Jupyter-based tools).
- **default_url**: The optional suffix of URL path when the tool launches (e.g., `/lab` for JupyterLab).
- **with_path**: Boolean, whether the tool supports a path to a file or directory. This also enables tools to be launched from files in the NOMAD UI.
- **display_name**: The name of the tool displayed in the list NOMAD NORTH tools.
- **description**: A brief description of what the tool does.
- **maintainer**: List of maintainer information with name and email.
- **image_pull_policy**: When to pull the image in K8s deployments.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need these? We are generating information about these options at `(../../../reference/config.md#northtool)` automatically anywhere (see the link in line 82). So I feel this is just writing the options, whereas the other page is auto-generated. If we want to give more explanation what each of these do, we should do so in the Pydantic model in `nomad`, and not ad-hoc here on the page. This will be hard to maintain and keep up to date.

Reviewer: could be removed but then there should a cross-ref guiding users to the autogenerated list that is in the reference section

Author: I would throw a link here, so that the user can immediately see which field does what.

Reviewer 2: There's a link already right in the line above (see ~line 82)

my_north_tool = NorthToolEntryPoint(id='my-north-tool', north_tool=tool)
```

!!! note

>     To test a Docker image in NOMAD NORTH tool, you do not need to publish the Docker image in a registry but can build it locally and add the image in the NORTHTool configuration. NOMAD NORTH tool will check for local images first before pulling from a registry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To test a Docker image in NOMAD NORTH tool, you do not need to publish the Docker image in a registry but can build it locally and add the image in the NORTHTool configuration. A NOMAD NORTH tool will check for local images first before pulling from a registry. 
```

Reviewer: is the checking code part of `NORTH tool` or NOMAD, in the latter case replace "NOMAD NORTH tool" by "NOMAD" or "NORTH" respectively

Author: NOMAD NORTH tool is a different service of NOMAD. The launching of the container is done by NOMAD, more specifically by `NOMAD NORTH tool` component. However, I am using NOMAD here as suggested.

Here you can see that a `NORTHTool` object called `tool` was defined. We also instantiate
the entry point object `my_north_tool` using the tool. This is the
final entry point instance in which you specify the default parameterization

> and other details about the NORTH tools. In the reference you can see all of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and other details about the NORTH tool. In the reference you can see all of the
```

available configuration options for a [`NorthToolEntryPoint`](../../../reference/plugins.

> md#northtoolentrypoint) and a [`NorthTool`](../../../reference/config.md#northtool).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
md#northtoolentrypoint) and a [`NORTHTool`](../../../reference/config.md#northtool).
```

Reviewer: See difference between capitalization in script snippet above and the reference here

### Key Configuration Options

> When defining your NORTH tool, consider these important configuration options:

Reviewer: there is a complete reference, we could link also to this in addition

Author: Addressed!

Author: Text is not available anymore.

> - **image**: Location of the Docker image (e.g., `ghcr.io/<username>/<plugin-name>:latest`). This should point to a container registry where your image is published.

Reviewer: what to write there for a locally stored image for testing purposes?

Author: Addressed!

> - **file_extensions**: The file extensions of files that this tool should be launchable for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **file_extensions**: The list of file extensions that this tool should be launchable for.
```

Author: Removed!

- **mount_path**: The directory inside the container where NOMAD data or other relevant files for data analysis will be mounted (e.g., `/home/jovyan/data` for Jupyter-based tools).
- **default_url**: The optional suffix of URL path when the tool launches (e.g., `/lab` for JupyterLab).

> - **with_path**: Boolean, whether the tool supports a path to a file or directory. This also enables tools to be launched from files in the NOMAD UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **with_path**: The boolean option that defines whether the tool supports a path to a file (True) or directory (False). This also enables tools to be launched from files in the NOMAD UI.
```

Author: This is not there anymore.

- **display_name**: The name of the tool displayed in the list NOMAD NORTH tools.
- **description**: A brief description of what the tool does.
- **maintainer**: List of maintainer information with name and email.

> - **image_pull_policy**: When to pull the image in K8s deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **image_pull_policy**: When to pull the image in k8s deployments.
```

Reviewer: unsure about this one

Author: The text is removed.

```

## Creating `NORTH` images
The core of a NORTH tool is the container image that contains the actual software tools, examples,

> and enviornment needed and so on to run the tool. In this section we will discuss how to create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and environment needed and so on to run the tool. In this section we will discuss how to create
```

> such images. As a requirement, one needs to have [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such images. Docker images can be build either locally or remotely, instructed via the GitHub CI. As a requirement, one needs to have [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
```

Reviewer: We should check what is the starting point for somebody reading this howto, if that person has nomad already installed locally, i.e., a developer role, docker is already installed, we could just mention this then, e.g.,

"If you haven't installed docker yet, ..."

installed on the local system. Which allows to build and test the images locally before publishing them
to a container registry. Otherways to create container images in an automated way (e.g., using CI/CD pipelines)
are also possible and which is our goal to do it and keep the images up to date automatically along with developments
of the nomad-plugin containing the NORTH tool.

- What to include in the discussion

>    - Basic requreirements for NORTH images e.g., Docker installation, Find the a slim base image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Basic requirements for NORTH images e.g., docker installation, find and as slim as possible base image
```
we should suggest though using either our jupyter or nomad-north-desktop base

>    - Add a reference to the best practices for creating a Docker image from Docker docs

Reviewer: capitalization should be done consistently, "Docker" or "docker",

hyphenation we should also agree on, `NORTH` or NORTH, what to use, use text replacement throughout if needed

Have we settled on one way to write stuff, e.g., why `NORTH` but not `docker` ?

Any best practices for writing the docs?

   - Docker registries (GHCR, DockerHub, Bitbucket etc)

>    - TODO: Give links of the docker where one can read the documentation for corresponding docker commands.

Reviewer: Think one note we should tell users is that they are not required to push their image to any of the FAIRmat repos but that they can really just start like you did also on your local github, while maybe clear for fairmat personnel I am sure this is not what everybody outside is aware of.

### Juypter-based tools

> The purpose of having Jupyter image based NORTH tools is to provide users with an interactive

Reviewer: Given that we distinguish gui and non-gui images it would be good to use the word interactively only for gui containers

environment for data analysis and visualization on the data that is generated and stored

> using the plugins that is hosting this NORTH tool. Docker file should start with some arguments and the arguments can be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the plugins that is hosting this NORTH tool.

In what follows, we explain the contents of the Docker file.

Firstly, the base image and environment variables are defined.
```

Reviewer: I agree that we should not have all these documentation in the docker file itself, I think also though that our dockerfiles are often more complex than typical beginner examples especially with changing rights, permission management and so forth. 

I support that breaking up the dockerfile guide-through into clear command block/chunks is a good approach.

To my taste a few signaling keywords, like firstly, secondly, in the next block etc would chunkify the content even better.

to customize the image build. Here, you can customize the image according to your needs by adding
more dependencies, tools, and configurations. Then the variables are followed by the base image.

```Dockerfile
# Part from docker/Dockerfile.jupyter

# Global ARG variables
# ARG are accessible until the next FROM instruction
ARG BASE_JUPYTER=quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook
ARG JUPYTER_TAG=2025-10-20
ARG UV_VERSION=0.9
ARG PLUGIN_NAME="PLUGIN"
ARG SETUPTOOLS_SCM_PRETEND_VERSION_FOR_TEST_NORTH="0.0.0+0.gunknown"
# Relative path to docker build context
ARG EXAMPLES_DIR="src/<plugin_name>/north_tools/<tool_name>/examples"
FROM ghcr.io/astral-sh/uv:${UV_VERSION} AS uv_stage

FROM ${BASE_JUPYTER}:${JUPYTER_TAG} AS scipy_notebook
```

> In this part of the Dockerfile, we define several global (ARG are accessible  until the FROM instruction) arguments  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this part of the Dockerfile, we define several [build variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/). Unlike ENV variables that are available to the container at runtime, mind [scoping](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/) ARG variables.
```

- `BASE_JUPYTER` specifies the base Jupyter image
- `JUPYTER_TAG` specifies the tag of the Jupyter base image
- `UV_VERSION` specifies the version of the UV image
- `PLUGIN_NAME` specifies the name of the plugin if someone wants to keep the entire plugin code inside the image 

>     In this case conciously comment out the line `RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}` in dockerfile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this case consciously comment out the line `RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}` in dockerfile
```

- `SETUPTOOLS_SCM_PRETEND_VERSION_FOR_TEST_NORTH` is used to set a dynamic version for the plugin during the build process
- `EXAMPLES_DIR` specifies the relative (relative to the docker build context) path to the examples directory within the plugin structure

> Next we specify the shell environment, copy built uv files from uv stage to the current stage, make global ARG variables available as environment variables,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we specify the shell environment, copy built uv files from uv stage to the current stage, make global ARG variables available as environment variables,
```

setup environment variables, and install required dependencies.

```Dockerfile
# Part from docker/Dockerfile.jupyter

# https://github.com/hadolint/hadolint/wiki/DL4006
# https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/wiki/SC3014
SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-o", "pipefail", "-c"]

COPY --from=uv_stage /uv /uvx /bin/

USER root

# Define environment variables
# With pre-exinsting NB_USER="jovyan" and NB_UID=100, NB_GID=1000
ENV HOME=/home/${NB_USER}
ENV CONDA_DIR=/opt/conda

# Make ARG variables available as environment variables
ARG PLUGIN_NAME
ARG SETUPTOOLS_SCM_PRETEND_VERSION_FOR_TEST_NORTH
ARG EXAMPLES_DIR

RUN apt-get update \
 && apt-get install --yes --quiet --no-install-recommends \

>       libgomp1 \

Reviewer: `libgomp1` a dependency of gcc also should come from `build-essential` just fine

      libmagic1 \
      file \

>       gcc \

Reviewer: `gcc` why required, we should test with `build-essential` alone
otherwise you may end up with having three different gcc versions in the container,

      build-essential \
      curl \
      zip \
      unzip \
      git

# By default scipy-notebook:2025-10-20 has node 18
# But, node > 20 needed for jupyterlab >= 4.4.10
RUN curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_24.x | bash -

RUN apt-get install nodejs -y \
       && npm install -g configurable-http-proxy@^4.2.0 \
       # clean cache and logs
       && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* /var/log/* /var/tmp/* ~/.npm
```
 By coping the build uv files from the pre-built uv stage, we ensure that the necessary uv components are included in the final image and

>  using uv as package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 and uv is used as the package manager.
```

# https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/docker/#intermediate-layers
# Install dependencies
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \
    uv sync --locked --no-editable --extra=north --extra=nomad --inexact

WORKDIR ${HOME}
RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

RUN jupyter lab build --dev-build=False --minimize=False && \
    fix-permissions "/home/${NB_USER}" \ 
    && fix-permissions "${CONDA_DIR}"

WORKDIR ${HOME}

# copy north examples
COPY --chown=${NB_UID}:${NB_GID}  ${EXAMPLES_DIR} ${HOME}/examples

RUN touch ${HOME}/.hushlogin
```

The parts described above provide a basic structure for Dockerfiles used to create Jupyter-based docker images for NORTH tools.
Developers or users can customize these Dockerfiles further based on their specific requirements,
such as adding more dependencies, tools, and configurations.

With such a Dockerfile, one can build the image locally using the following command:

```bash
docker build -f docker/Dockerfile.jupyter --build-arg PLUGIN_NAME=<plugin_name> --build-arg SETUPTOOLS_SCM_PRETEND_VERSION_FOR_TEST_NORTH=$(scripts/get_git_version.sh) \
--build-arg EXAMPLES_DIR=<examples_dir> -t <image_name>:<tag> .
```

> The script `scripts/get_git_version.sh` is a simple script that extracts the current git version or tag of the plugin which comes with [template repository](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-plugin-template){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} or one can write the following script in a file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script `scripts/get_git_version.sh` is a script that extracts the current git version or tag of the plugin which comes with [template repository](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-plugin-template){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} or one can write the following script in a file.
```

```

## Creating `NORTH` images
The core of a NORTH tool is the container image that contains the actual software tools, examples,
and environment needed to run the tool. In this section we will discuss how to create

> such images. Docker images can be built either locally or remotely, instructed via the GitHub CI (discussed later).

Reviewer 2: discussed later -> make this a link to the section where you describe this

See how to define links in the [writing guide](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-docs/blob/develop/docs/writing_guide.md?plain=1)

### Prerequisites

Before creating NORTH images, ensure you have:

- **Docker installed**: [Get Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} installed on your local system. This allows you to build and test images locally before publishing.
- **Base image selected**: Choose an appropriate slim base image for your tool (e.g., `<image-name:tag>` like `quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook:2025-10-20` for Jupyter-based tools).
- **Container registry access**: Access to a container registry for publishing your images (see [Docker registries](#docker-registries)).

> For Docker best practices, refer to the [official Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/develop/dev-best-practices/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if that is needed, but okay.

Author: I agree that **Base image selected** is redundant and removed. As we are wrtting the this also for beginners, Many of them might not even know about the concept of the container registry.
Following Docker best practices is helpful for beginners and a reminder to follow the practices. In some cases, this is really helpful, e.g., following the best practices reduces the image build and development time significantly. Many may not know what layer in the Docker image is and how to take benefits from that layer concept.

### Docker Registries

NORTH tools support images from various container registries:

- **GitHub Container Registry (GHCR)**: `ghcr.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Recommended for GitHub-hosted projects. Integrates seamlessly with GitHub Actions.
- **Docker Hub**: `docker.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Popular public registry with free tier for public images.
- **Quay.io**: `quay.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Red Hat's container registry with strong security features.
- **Private registries**: Custom registry URLs for organization-specific deployments.

> !!! note "Publishing Your Images"

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-docs/blob/develop/docs/writing_guide.md?plain=1#L87, please do not use custom titles

    You are not required to push your images to FAIRmat repositories. You can publish images to your own GitHub Container Registry (e.g., `ghcr.io/<your-username>/<your-repo>`) or any other registry you have access to.

### Jupyter-based tools
Jupyter-based NORTH tools provide users with an interactive computing environment for data analysis 
and visualization. These tools are particularly useful for exploratory data analysis, creating 
reproducible workflows, and sharing computational narratives.

#### Dockerfile Structure

> A Dockerfile for a Jupyter-based NORTH tool typically consists of several stages. Here, we will go through a typical Dockerfile splitting the discussion in several parts. For a full example of the Dockerfile, follow [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Dockerfile for a Jupyter-based NORTH tool typically consists of several stages. Here, we will go through a typical Dockerfile splitting the discussion in several parts. You can find a full example of a Dockerfile for a Juypter-based NORTH tool in [the cookiecutter-nomad-plugin template](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) 
```

The build arguments at the top allow customization of the image:

```Dockerfile
ARG BASE_JUPYTER=quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook
ARG JUPYTER_TAG=2025-10-20
ARG UV_VERSION=0.9
ARG PLUGIN_NAME="PLUGIN"
FROM ghcr.io/astral-sh/uv:${UV_VERSION} AS uv_stage

FROM ${BASE_JUPYTER}:${JUPYTER_TAG} AS scipy_notebook
```

> In this part of the Dockerfile, we define several [build variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/). Unlike [ENV variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#environment-variables) that are available to the container at runtime, mind [scoping](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#scoping) of ARG variables.

Reviewer 2: I get what you are trying to say here, but "mind scoping" sounds weird.

```suggestion
In this part of the Dockerfile, we define several [build variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/). Unlike [ENV variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#environment-variables) that are available to the container at runtime, ARG variables are [scoped](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#scoping) to the build stage in which they are defined
```

- `BASE_JUPYTER`: Specifies the base Jupyter image (e.g., `<image-name>` like `quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook`)
- `JUPYTER_TAG`: Specifies the version tag of the base Jupyter image (e.g., `2025-10-20`)

> - `UV_VERSION`: Specifies the version of the uv package manager image

Reviewer 2: Add link to `uv` webpage

Reviewer 2: Use "`uv`" here and elsewhere with ``

- `PLUGIN_NAME`: Specifies the name of your plugin. Used for copying plugin code into the image. 
  If you want to keep the plugin code inside the image permanently, consciously comment out the cleanup line `RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}`.

We use a multi-stage build approach:
1. First stage (`uv_stage`): Copies the uv binary from the official uv image
2. Second stage (`scipy_notebook`): Builds on the Jupyter base image with uv included for environment management.

#### System Setup and Dependencies

> Next, we configure the shell environment, copy the uv package manager, and install system dependencies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we configure the shell environment, copy the `uv` package manager, and install system dependencies:
```

Reviewer 2: and elsewhere

5. **System dependencies**: Install essential build tools, libraries, and utilities:
    - Build tools: `build-essential` (includes `gcc`, `g++`, `make`, and related tools)
    - Libraries: `libmagic1`
    - Utilities: `curl`, `git`, `zip`, `unzip`, `file`
6. **Node.js upgrade**: Install Node.js 24+ (required for JupyterLab >= 4.4.10, as the scipy-notebook base image typically includes Node.js 18)
7. **Cleanup**: Remove package manager cache to reduce image size

#### Python Dependencies and Final Setup

Finally, we switch back to the non-root user and install Python dependencies:

```Dockerfile
USER ${NB_USER}

# uv env
ENV UV_PROJECT_ENVIRONMENT=${CONDA_DIR} \
    UV_LINK_MODE=copy \
    UV_NO_CACHE=1 \
    # Use python from conda which is default for scipy-notebook
    # so that uv pip and pip both refer to the same python
    # If needed one can create another venv with 'uv venv'
    UV_SYSTEM_PYTHON=1 \

COPY --chown=${NB_USER}:${NB_GID} . ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

WORKDIR ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

# https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/docker/#intermediate-layers
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \

>     uv pip install . --group north

Reviewer 2: This is not what we are doing in the [template](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/AddNorthTools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile#L65).

I believe for isolated tools (which should be the default), the line should be
```
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \
    uv pip install --group north
```
without the `.` install

Reviewer 2: Please double check that the Dockerfile excerpts here are the same as in the template

WORKDIR ${HOME}
RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

RUN jupyter lab build --dev-build=False --minimize=False && \
    fix-permissions "/home/${NB_USER}" \ 
    && fix-permissions "${CONDA_DIR}"

WORKDIR ${HOME}

RUN touch ${HOME}/.hushlogin
```

**Key steps in this section:**

1. **Switch to non-root user**: Security best practice - run the application as `${NB_USER}` (typically `jovyan`)
2. **Configure uv**: Set environment variables for uv to work with the conda environment:
    - `UV_PROJECT_ENVIRONMENT`: Points to conda directory
    - `UV_SYSTEM_PYTHON`: Use system Python (conda's Python) instead of creating a new virtual environment
    - `UV_LINK_MODE=copy`: Copy packages instead of linking
    - `UV_NO_CACHE=1`: Disable caching to reduce image size
3. **Copy plugin code**: Copy your plugin source code into the container

> 4. **Install dependencies**: Use `uv pip install` to install dependencies from the `north` dependency group in `pyproject.toml`

Reviewer 2: This is the place where we should highlight that _if_ the user wants to include the plugin inside the tool, they can run
```
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \
    uv pip install . --group north
```
instead

5. **Cleanup plugin code**: Remove the plugin source code (unless you want to keep it)
6. **Build JupyterLab**: Compile JupyterLab extensions and assets
7. **Fix permissions**: Ensure proper file permissions for the user
8. **Configure startup**: Create `.hushlogin` to suppress login messages

> The structure described above provides a solid foundation for Jupyter-based NORTH tools but not necessarily representing the exact Dockerfile you need. However, the concepts will help you to customize the [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) based on your specific requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The structure described above provides a solid foundation for Jupyter-based NORTH tools, but doesn't necessarily represents the exact Dockerfile you need. However, these building block will help you to customize the [Dockerfile in the cookiecutter-nomad-plugin template](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) based on your specific requirements.
```

### Building the Image Locally

With such a Dockerfile, you can build the image locally for testing:

```bash
docker build -f src/<module_name>/north_tools/<tool_name>/Dockerfile \
  --build-arg PLUGIN_NAME=<plugin_name> \
  --build-arg JUPYTER_TAG=<jupyter_tag> \
  --build-arg UV_VERSION=<uv_version> \
  -t <image_name>:<tag> .
```

**Parameters:**
- `<module_name>`: Your Python module name (e.g., `nomad_example`)
- `<tool_name>`: Your NORTH tool name (e.g., `my_tool`)
- `<plugin_name>`: Your plugin name (e.g., `nomad-example-plugin`) Optionally can be left to default as code is removed after build process.
- `<jupyter_tag>`: Jupyter base image tag (e.g., `2025-10-20`) optionally can be left to default
- `<uv_version>`: UV version (e.g., `0.9`) optionally can be left to default
- `<image_name>`: Your image name (e.g., `my-jupyter-tool`)
- `<tag>`: Version tag (e.g., `latest`, `v1.0.0`)

**Example:**
```bash
docker build -f src/foobar/north_tools/my_tool/Dockerfile \
  --build-arg PLUGIN_NAME=foobar \
  --build-arg JUPYTER_TAG=2025-10-20 \
  --build-arg UV_VERSION=0.9 \

>   -t ghcr.io/myusername/foobar:latest .

Reviewer 2: To shorten, I would remove all optional parameters from the build and from the parameters list. Rather, I would mention it below.

```suggestion
docker build -f src/<module_name>/north_tools/<tool_name>/Dockerfile -t <image_name>:<tag> .

**Parameters:**
- `<module_name>`: Your Python module name (e.g., `nomad_example`)
- `<tool_name>`: Your NORTH tool name (e.g., `my_tool`)
- `<image_name>`: Your image name (e.g., `my-jupyter-tool`)
- `<tag>`: Version tag (e.g., `latest`, `v1.0.0`)

The default values of all build arguments (like `PLUGIN_NAME`, `JUPYTER_TAG`, `UV_VERSION`, etc.) can be changed in the build call by passing along `--build-arg <BUILD-ARG>=<new-value>`.

**Example:**
```bash
docker build -f src/foobar/north_tools/my_tool/Dockerfile \
  --build-arg PLUGIN_NAME=foobar \
  --build-arg JUPYTER_TAG=2025-10-20 \
  --build-arg UV_VERSION=0.9 \
  -t ghcr.io/myusername/foobar:latest .
```

```

> ### Managing Python Dependencies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Managing Python dependencies
```

> Python dependencies for your NORTH tool should be defined in the `pyproject.toml` file using dependency groups:

Reviewer 2: Link to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-groups/

```toml
[dependency-groups]
north = [
    "jupyterlab",
    "ipywidgets",
    "pandas>=2.0.0",
    "matplotlib>=3.5.0",
    # Add your specific dependencies here
]
```

**Installation in Dockerfile:**

You can install these dependencies using either:

```Dockerfile
# Option 1: Install from dependency group (recommended)
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \
    uv pip install --group north

# Option 2: Full sync with locked dependencies
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \

>     uv sync --locked --no-editable --extra=north --extra=nomad --inexact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    uv sync --locked --no-editable --extra=north --inexact
```
Most plugins  would not have the `nomad` extra (only in pynxtools we have it as a special case)

Reviewer 2: Why `inexact` here?

Author: It makes the safeguard for the conda environment, `uv sync` command overwrites conda libraries if it removes other libraries and packages that are not included in the `pyproject.toml` file, which breaks the JupyterHub orchestration. I also added in coment.

Reviewer 2: Ok, makes sense, thanks

```

## Creating `NORTH` images
The core of a NORTH tool is the container image that contains the actual software tools, examples,
and environment needed to run the tool. In this section we will discuss how to create
such images. Docker images can be built either locally or remotely, instructed via the GitHub CI (discussed later).

### Prerequisites

Before creating NORTH images, ensure you have:

- **Docker installed**: [Get Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} installed on your local system. This allows you to build and test images locally before publishing.

> - **Base image selected**: Choose an appropriate slim base image for your tool (e.g., `<image-name:tag>` like `quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook:2025-10-20` for Jupyter-based tools).

Reviewer: quay is also a hyperlink to the actual image location for interested folks to learn more maybe add the link e.g., [for Jupyter-based tools](https://quay.io/repository/jupyter/scipy-notebook?tab=tags&tag=2025-10-20)

Author: Addressed!

- **Container registry access**: Access to a container registry for publishing your images (see [Docker registries](#docker-registries)).

For Docker best practices, refer to the [official Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/develop/dev-best-practices/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}.

### Docker Registries

NORTH tools support images from various container registries:

- **GitHub Container Registry (GHCR)**: `ghcr.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Recommended for GitHub-hosted projects. Integrates seamlessly with GitHub Actions.
- **Docker Hub**: `docker.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Popular public registry with free tier for public images.
- **Quay.io**: `quay.io/<username>/<image-name>` - Red Hat's container registry with strong security features.
- **Private registries**: Custom registry URLs for organization-specific deployments.

!!! note "Publishing Your Images"

>     You are not required to push your images to FAIRmat repositories. You can publish images to your own GitHub Container Registry (e.g., `ghcr.io/<your-username>/<your-repo>`) or any other registry you have access to.

Reviewer: is this possible at all for non-FAIRmat folks to push their images, then basically anybody could use the FAIRmat resources for flooding us with unrelated containers, we should remove the sentence if non-fairmat members can anyway not push to fairmat, if they can we should say,

Author: Not for everybody. Addressed!

### Jupyter-based tools
Jupyter-based NORTH tools provide users with an interactive computing environment for data analysis 

> and visualization. These tools are particularly useful for exploratory data analysis, creating 

Reviewer: exploratory analysis, reproducible, narratives, i do not like this, it might click with people but then writing **exploratory analyses** suffices. 

jupyter does not prevent an overwriting of the cell execution sequence so reproducible comes with substantial limitations, reproducible is that people use the same code and environment,

Author: Removed!

reproducible workflows, and sharing computational narratives.

#### Dockerfile Structure

> A Dockerfile for a Jupyter-based NORTH tool typically consists of several stages. Here, we will go through a typical Dockerfile splitting the discussion in several parts. For a full example of the Dockerfile, follow [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building a Dockerfile is a process of layering images. Several stages can be distinguished with each stage add at least one layer. In what follows, we guide through and explain a typical Dockerfile. For a full example of the Dockerfile please follow [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile). 
```

Author: Addressed!

The build arguments at the top allow customization of the image:

```Dockerfile
ARG BASE_JUPYTER=quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook
ARG JUPYTER_TAG=2025-10-20
ARG UV_VERSION=0.9
ARG PLUGIN_NAME="PLUGIN"
FROM ghcr.io/astral-sh/uv:${UV_VERSION} AS uv_stage

FROM ${BASE_JUPYTER}:${JUPYTER_TAG} AS scipy_notebook
```

In this part of the Dockerfile, we define several [build variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/). Unlike [ENV variables](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#environment-variables) that are available to the container at runtime, mind [scoping](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/variables/#scoping) of ARG variables.

- `BASE_JUPYTER`: Specifies the base Jupyter image (e.g., `<image-name>` like `quay.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook`)
- `JUPYTER_TAG`: Specifies the version tag of the base Jupyter image (e.g., `2025-10-20`)
- `UV_VERSION`: Specifies the version of the uv package manager image
- `PLUGIN_NAME`: Specifies the name of your plugin. Used for copying plugin code into the image. 
  If you want to keep the plugin code inside the image permanently, consciously comment out the cleanup line `RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}`.

> We use a multi-stage build approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use a multi-stage build approach: In the first stage ...  . In the second stage ... .

make one paragraph with no numbering
```

Author: Addressed!

#### System Setup and Dependencies

Next, we configure the shell environment, copy the uv package manager, and install system dependencies:

```Dockerfile
# https://github.com/hadolint/hadolint/wiki/DL4006
# https://github.com/koalaman/shellcheck/wiki/SC3014
SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-o", "pipefail", "-c"]

COPY --from=uv_stage /uv /uvx /bin/

USER root

# Define environment variables
# With pre-existing NB_USER="jovyan" and NB_UID=100, NB_GID=1000
ENV HOME=/home/${NB_USER}
ENV CONDA_DIR=/opt/conda

# Make ARG variables available as environment variables
ARG PLUGIN_NAME

RUN apt-get update \
 && apt-get install --yes --quiet --no-install-recommends \
      libmagic1 \
      file \
      build-essential \
      curl \
      zip \
      unzip \
      git

# By default scipy-notebook:2025-10-20 has node 18
# But, node > 20 needed for jupyterlab >= 4.4.10
RUN curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_24.x | bash -

RUN apt-get install nodejs -y \
       && npm install -g configurable-http-proxy@^4.2.0 \
       # clean cache and logs
       && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* /var/log/* /var/tmp/* ~/.npm
```

> **Key steps in this section:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key steps in this stage are:
```

1. **Shell configuration**: Use bash with pipefail for safer script execution
2. **Copy uv binary**: Copies the uv package manager from the `uv_stage` for fast Python package installation

> 3. **Switch to root**: System packages require root privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Switch to root**: Installing system packages require root privileges
```

Author: Addressed!

4. **Environment variables**: Define `HOME` and `CONDA_DIR` for consistent paths
5. **System dependencies**: Install essential build tools, libraries, and utilities:
    - Build tools: `build-essential` (includes `gcc`, `g++`, `make`, and related tools)
    - Libraries: `libmagic1`
    - Utilities: `curl`, `git`, `zip`, `unzip`, `file`

> 6. **Node.js upgrade**: Install Node.js 24+ (required for JupyterLab >= 4.4.10, as the scipy-notebook base image typically includes Node.js 18)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Node.js upgrade**: Install `node.js` 24+ (required for `jupyterLab >= 4.4.10`, as the scipy-notebook base image typically includes `node.js` 18)
```

Author: Addressed!

7. **Cleanup**: Remove package manager cache to reduce image size

#### Python Dependencies and Final Setup

Finally, we switch back to the non-root user and install Python dependencies:

```Dockerfile
USER ${NB_USER}

# uv env
ENV UV_PROJECT_ENVIRONMENT=${CONDA_DIR} \
    UV_LINK_MODE=copy \
    UV_NO_CACHE=1 \
    # Use python from conda which is default for scipy-notebook
    # so that uv pip and pip both refer to the same python
    # If needed one can create another venv with 'uv venv'
    UV_SYSTEM_PYTHON=1 \

COPY --chown=${NB_USER}:${NB_GID} . ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

WORKDIR ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

# https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/docker/#intermediate-layers
RUN --mount=type=cache,target=/root/.cache/uv \
    uv pip install . --group north

WORKDIR ${HOME}
RUN rm -rf ${HOME}/${PLUGIN_NAME}

RUN jupyter lab build --dev-build=False --minimize=False && \
    fix-permissions "/home/${NB_USER}" \ 
    && fix-permissions "${CONDA_DIR}"

WORKDIR ${HOME}

RUN touch ${HOME}/.hushlogin
```

> **Key steps in this section:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key steps in this section:
```

Author: Addressed!

1. **Switch to non-root user**: Security best practice - run the application as `${NB_USER}` (typically `jovyan`)
2. **Configure uv**: Set environment variables for uv to work with the conda environment:
    - `UV_PROJECT_ENVIRONMENT`: Points to conda directory
    - `UV_SYSTEM_PYTHON`: Use system Python (conda's Python) instead of creating a new virtual environment
    - `UV_LINK_MODE=copy`: Copy packages instead of linking
    - `UV_NO_CACHE=1`: Disable caching to reduce image size
3. **Copy plugin code**: Copy your plugin source code into the container
4. **Install dependencies**: Use `uv pip install` to install dependencies from the `north` dependency group in `pyproject.toml`
5. **Cleanup plugin code**: Remove the plugin source code (unless you want to keep it)
6. **Build JupyterLab**: Compile JupyterLab extensions and assets
7. **Fix permissions**: Ensure proper file permissions for the user
8. **Configure startup**: Create `.hushlogin` to suppress login messages

> The structure described above provides a solid foundation for Jupyter-based NORTH tools but not necessarily representing the exact Dockerfile you need. However, the concepts will help you to customize the [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) based on your specific requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure described above provides a solid foundation for Jupyter-based NORTH tools but does not necessarily represent the exact Dockerfile you need. However, the concepts will help you to customize the [Dockerfile in cookiecutter-nomad-plugin](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/cookiecutter-nomad-plugin/blob/main/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.plugin_name%7D%7D/py_sources/src/north_tools/%7B%7Bcookiecutter.north_tool_name%7D%7D/Dockerfile) based on your specific requirements.
```

Author: Addressed!

### Building the Image Locally

With such a Dockerfile, you can build the image locally for testing:

```bash
docker build -f src/<module_name>/north_tools/<tool_name>/Dockerfile \
  --build-arg PLUGIN_NAME=<plugin_name> \
  --build-arg JUPYTER_TAG=<jupyter_tag> \
  --build-arg UV_VERSION=<uv_version> \
  -t <image_name>:<tag> .
```

> **Parameters:**

Reviewer: maybe one more line-break required to have this a bullet point list otherwise more difficult to read

Author: Addressed!

    software created for non-Linux environments), we refer to the existing example tools.

## Versioning and tagging `NORTH` images
When creating container images for NORTH tools, it is important to follow a consistent versioning

> and tagging scheme. This helps users identify the correct version of the tool they need and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and tagging scheme. This helps users identify the correct tool version they need and
```

> ensures compatibility with the NOMAD platform. For locally built image one can give any tag

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures compatibility with the NOMAD platform. For a locally built image one can give any tag
```

in the build command as shown in the previous section. 

> However, when publishing the images to a container registry, it is recommended to use semantic versioning (SemVer) for tagging the images and add an additinal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, when publishing the images to a container registry, it is recommended to use [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) for tagging the images and adding an additional
```

> `latest` tag for the most recent stable release. Image with a tag according to the pull request can also be created for testing purposes before merging the pull request.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`latest` tag for the most recent stable release. An image with a tag according to the pull request can also be created for testing purposes before merging the pull request.  
```

## Testing NORTH tool
After successfully creating a docker image for your NORTH tool, it is crucial to test it thoroughly

> to ensure that it functions as expected within the NOMAD environment. One can test the image by cteating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ensure that it functions as expected within the NOMAD environment. One can test the image by creating
```

containers from the image either locally or using automated testing in a CI/CD pipeline.

### Local testing

> For local testing, one needs to run corresponding image container by mounting the test data directory to the container. And then access the tool via a web browser. Here is an example command to run a Jupyter-based NORTH tool container locally:

Reviewer: "corresponding to what"

"to run a corresponding"

> For local testing, one needs to run corresponding image container by mounting the test data directory to the container. And then access the tool via a web browser. Here is an example command to run a Jupyter-based NORTH tool container locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For local testing, one needs to run corresponding image container by mounting the test data directory to the container. Thereafter, one should try accessing the tool via a web browser. Here is an example command to run a Jupyter-based NORTH tool container locally:
```

```bash
docker run -p 8888:8888 --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/work/test" <image_name>:<tag>
```

> Or, Run a command that starts the image container and runs the command inside the container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, an example follows which instructs to run a command that starts the image container and runs the command inside the container:
```

```bash
docker run --rm -p 8888:8888 --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/test" <image_name>:<tag>  /bin/bash -c "jupyter execute /home/jovyan/test/<path/to/notebook>"
```

### Automated testing
To make the testing process developer amicable and to ensure that the Jupyter-based NORTH tools

> work as expected after adding new features or version compatibility of the analysis software we recommend to set up automated testing using CI/CD pipelines. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
work as expected after having added new features or using different versions of the analysis software, we recommend to set up automated testing using a CI/CD pipeline. 
```

    software created for non-Linux environments), we refer to the existing example tools.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a # TODO here that this is to be done when we have experience with building these tools with the new desktop base

Author: I just commented it out. It seems weird if we push the TODO in productions

## Versioning and tagging `NORTH` images
When creating container images for NORTH tools, it is important to follow a consistent versioning
and tagging scheme.

### Tagging Strategy

**For local builds:** You can use any tag during development:
```bash
docker build ... -t my-tool:dev
```

**For published images:** Follow [semantic versioning (SemVer)](https://semver.org/):
- **Version tags**: `v1.0.0`, `v1.2.3`, etc. - Specific releases
- **latest tag**: Points to the most recent stable release
- **main/develop tags**: Track the main or development branch
- **PR tags**: `pr-123` for testing pull requests before merging

**GitHub Actions automatically creates:**
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:v1.0.0` - When you tag a release
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:main` - On push to main branch  
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:pr-123` - For pull request #123

> - `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:latest` - Points to the latest tagged release  

Reviewer 2: These are all created with the `publish-north` pipeline? That seems excessive (esp. the PR one)

Author: The PR one is ok for me. Otherwise, we have to merge each and every commit to the main branch to see it build is successful. But the good thing is that there are no corresponding images for each branch, and the users can customise that commenting out a single line. Note that the tag `latest` and `v...` represent the same hash. Still, would you like to remove it?

Reviewer 2: No, that was my question, if we create individual images. Then keep it 👍

## Testing NORTH tool
After successfully creating a Docker image for your NORTH tool, thorough testing ensures it functions 
correctly within the NOMAD environment.

### Local Testing

#### Interactive Testing

Run the container interactively with a local data mount:

```bash
docker run --rm -p 8888:8888 \
  --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/test" \
  <image_name>:<tag>
```

**Then:**
1. Open your browser to `http://localhost:8888`
2. Navigate to the mounted test data
3. Test your analysis workflows
4. Verify all dependencies are working

> 

Reviewer 2: Please check that this enumeration works in the build.

#### Automated Notebook Execution

> Test Jupyter notebooks non-interactively, i.e., run a container and execute a notebook inside it. Once the test is done, the container will exit and be removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also test the container non-interactively, i.e., run the container and execute a Jupyter notebook inside it. Once the test is done, the container will exit and be removed.
```
"Test Jupyter notebooks" sounds weird when we are talking about testing the container

```bash
docker run --rm -p 8888:8888 \
  --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/test" \
  <image_name>:<tag> \
  /bin/bash -c "jupyter execute /home/jovyan/test/<path/to/notebook>.ipynb"
```

This validates that:
- All notebook cells execute without errors
- Dependencies are correctly installed
- Data can be read and processed

#### Testing with Shell Access

For debugging, run with an interactive shell:

```bash
docker run --rm -it \
  --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/test" \
  <image_name>:<tag> \
  /bin/bash
```

Inside the container, you can check several things:

```bash
# Check installed packages
uv pip list
# or
pip list

# Verify Python version
python --version

# Test imports
python -c "import jupyterlab; print(jupyterlab.__version__)"

# Check JupyterLab

> jupyter lab --version

Reviewer 2: This is probably trivial, I suggest we remove it

Author: I can remove it. Those small techniques helped me start debugging the broken things interactively. You may rethink whether we should keep it or not.

Reviewer 2: I dont' mind too much either way. I was just worried about the page being too long. You can decide if you want to keep them.

    software created for non-Linux environments), we refer to the existing example tools.

## Versioning and tagging `NORTH` images
When creating container images for NORTH tools, it is important to follow a consistent versioning
and tagging scheme.

### Tagging Strategy

**For local builds:** You can use any tag during development:
```bash
docker build ... -t my-tool:dev
```

> **For published images:** Follow [semantic versioning (SemVer)](https://semver.org/):

Reviewer: line breaking here also for proper bullet point list and below

Author: Addressed!

- **Version tags**: `v1.0.0`, `v1.2.3`, etc. - Specific releases
- **latest tag**: Points to the most recent stable release
- **main/develop tags**: Track the main or development branch
- **PR tags**: `pr-123` for testing pull requests before merging

**GitHub Actions automatically creates:**
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:v1.0.0` - When you tag a release
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:main` - On push to main branch  
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:pr-123` - For pull request #123
- `ghcr.io/<username>/<repo>:latest` - Points to the latest tagged release  

## Testing NORTH tool

> After successfully creating a Docker image for your NORTH tool, thorough testing ensures it functions 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having successfully created a Docker image for your NORTH tool, thorough testing ensures it functions as expected.
```

Author: Addressed!

correctly within the NOMAD environment.

### Local Testing

#### Interactive Testing

Run the container interactively with a local data mount:

```bash
docker run --rm -p 8888:8888 \
  --mount type=bind,src="/local/path/to/test/data",dst="/home/jovyan/test" \
  <image_name>:<tag>
```

> **Then:**

Reviewer: line break for bullet point list here

Author: Added!
